# Mean, Median and Mode

Find the median of the data: 5, 7, 4, 9, 5, 4, 4, 3

( ) 5.125
( ) 14
( ) 4.5
( ) 4

Find the mean of the following data:
12, 10, 15, 10, 16, 12, 10, 15, 15, 13

( ) 13
( ) 12.5
( ) 15
( ) 12.8

Find the mode of the following data:
20, 14, 12, 14, 26, 16, 18, 19, 14

( ) 14
( ) 17
( ) 26
( ) 16

Which measure best describes the scores of the team?
As a reminder, here are the scores:
70, 72, 74, 76, 80, 114

The \__?__ best describes the scores of the team because the \__?__ is higher than almost all of the scores in the data set.

( ) mean - median
( ) median - mean

On his first three quizzes, Patrick earned a 15, 18, and 16.  (A perfect score would have been 20 points.)  What does he need to earn on the next quiz to have a mean score of at least 17?

At leaset, how much must he earn?

## Q1 Median Algorithm

Complete this function by having the function return the median of the dataset.
Note: Write the median algorithm yourself and do not use built-in libraries to calculate it.

``` python

data = np.array([1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 7, 8, 4, 10, 0, 6, 7, 3, 0, 3, 0, 5, 7, 10, 1, 4, 9, 3])

def compute_median(dataset):
    """ Returns the median of the dataset. """
#TODO: Write your code here.
compute_median(data)

```

## Q2 Mode Algorithm

Complete this function by having the function return the mode of the dataset.

```python
data = np.array([1, 3, 5, 2, 3, 7, 8, 4, 10, 0, 6, 7, 3, 0, 3, 0, 5, 7, 10, 1, 4, 9, 3])

def compute_mode(dataset):
    """Returns the mode of the dataset. """
# TODO: Write your code here.
    return

compute_mode(data)
```

**Note**: You are allowed to use .sort() method to sort the array but should not use any functions from libraries that directly gives you the mode.

## z-score

### Q1.1 Age of Senators

The average age of senators in the 108th Congress was 59.5 years. If the standard deviation was 11.5 years, find the z scores corresponding to the oldest and youngest senators: Robert C. Byrd (D, WV), 86, and John Sununu (R, NH), 40.

### Q1.2 Teachers' salary

The average teacher’s salary in a particular state is $54,166. If the standard deviation is $10,200, find the salaries corresponding to the following z scores.
a. 2
b. -1
c. 0
d. 2.5
e. -1.6

Note: This is not a multi-choice question! For each z-score above, calculate the corresponding salary.

## Coefficient of Variation

### Q1.1 Sales of Automobiles

The mean of the number of sales of cars over a 3-month period is 87, and the standard deviation is 5. The mean of the commissions is \$5225, and the standard deviation is \$773.  Compare the variations of the two. Please show your work/calculations.
Which one is higher and what does that mean?

### Q1.2 Pages in Women’s Fitness Magazines

The mean for the number of pages of a sample of women’s fitness magazines is 132, with a variance of 23; the mean for the number of advertisements of a sample of women’s fitness magazines is 182, with a variance of 62. Compare the variations.
(please show your work/calculations).
Please show your work/calculations.
Which one is higher and what does that mean?
