# Intro - JavaScript React Native 

React Native is an exciting technology that you can use to create native apps for 
Android and iOS using a single code base written in JavaScript. In other words you will 
create a single code base in JavaScript that generates native iOS and Android apps. 

## What is React?

**React** is a JavaScript framework from Facebook. They describe it as: 

> A JavaScript library for building user interfaces.

React is the View in M**V**C.

> React : verb, respond or behave in a particular way in response to something.

React responds to changes. Isn't this what a user interface should do? React is similar 
to MVC but is also very different. React UI is built in a Component based architecture. 
Components.

> Component : noun, a part or element of a larger whole, especially a part of a machine 
> or vehicle.

Apps are broken down into components. Components can get very granular representing 
even very small parts of your interfaces. Components by definition are small parts 
that are assembled to make larger system. Components will often be made of more components!

- Component Based Architecture
    - https://medium.com/@dan.shapiro1210/understanding-component-based-architecture-3ff48ec0c238#.qk6lwll4n

Components are configured with **props** (short for properties) and **state**. 

> Properties : an essential or distinctive attribute or quality of a thing

Properties configure a component supplying information that can make any instance of 
a component unqiue.

> State : the particular condition that someone or something is in at a specific time.

State holds the condition of a component in time. As state changes a component changes. 
Changing the state of a component will cause a component to redraw itself.

**React Native** is described as:

> A framework for building native apps using React

React is a JavaScript framework for creating Native apps. It is built on React, it uses 
React as an underlying framework. Even though React Native is written in  JavaScript it 
still produces native apps (it doesn't produce "web apps" that run in a web view).

## Why Use React Native? 

The biggest advantage to React Native is the ability to use a single code base to write 
apps for Android and iOS. With smaller apps you should be able to achieve this. With 
larger apps you should still be able to write a majority of your once for both 
Android and iOS, though there is likely to be situations where you will need to write 
some amount of code for specific to each platform. 

### Does it work on Mac and Windows?

You can build for Android and iOS on a Mac. Sadly you can not build for iOS on Windows. 

To build for iOS you will need to have Xcode installed. 

To build for Android you need to install:

- Java SE Dev Kit 8
- Android Studio

Follow the Guide here: 

- https://medium.com/@tewolfe2/5-steps-to-setting-up-your-macbook-for-react-native-7b8b1019eb6d#.49yxn8eoo

### Wait I'm Making native apps with JavaScript?

Yep. The apps generated by the React native framework are truly native. These are not web 
pages running in a web view. React Native apps are built from the many of the standard 
native components, for example UIView, UILabel, UIImageView on iOS which you express in 
JavaScript.

### But, how does that work? 

Magic. More seriously, the answer to this is beyond the scope of this discussion. In a 
nutshell, JSX elements generate native objects while JavaScript application logic is 
executed by a JavaScript run time interpreter which passes messages down to native 
systems. 

## Getting started - JavaScript Assessment

**To get the most out of React Native you will need to be able to write at least 
simple programs with JavaScript.**

As a beginning step you should assess your skill level with JavaScript. Try to 
solve the following problems. If you don't understand the some of the concepts 
in the problems don't worry, just try and solve the problems to the best of your
ability. 

Your work need only print it's output to the console. You do not need to 
write any HTML or CSS (unless you want to, and have time to finish in class). 

- Write a JavaScript module that acts as a shopping cart, providing the following 
features: 
    - Keeps a collection (the cart) of items, each with an id, name, price, and quantity
    - Provides a method to add items to the cart
        - Increase the quantity of an existing item or add a new item with a quantity of 1
        when an item already exists in the cart
    - Provide a method to remove an item from the cart
    - provide a method that writes a description of the cart to the console
    - Provide a method that returns the total cost of items in the cart
    
Your work should produce results somethinglike this:

```
shoppingCart.addItem(1, 'Pencil', 1.99, 1); // Adds a new item to the cart
shoppingCart.addItem(1, 'Pencil', 1.99, 1); // Should increase the quantity of item 1
shoppingCart.addItem(2, 'Apple', 0.99, 1);  // Add another item to the cart
shoppingCart.addItem(3, 'Banana', 1.10, 1); // etc. 
shoppingCart.addItem(4, 'Shoe', 11.99, 1);
shoppingCart.addItem(4, 'Shoe', 11.99, 1);  // Should have 5 items with total count of 6
shoppingCart.removeItem(1); // Removes and item from the cart with id 1 should decrease the quantity
shoppingCart.removeItem(1); // Should remove the item when quantity is 0. 

// Get the count and total of the cart. 
console.log(shoppingCart.getCartCount()); // displays 4
console.log(shoppingCart.getCartTotal()); // displays 26.07 

// Display the current cart to the console. 
console.log(shoppingCart.displayCart());  
/* displays something like: 
Apple 0.99 x 1 = 0.99
Banana 1.1 x 1 = 1.1
Shoe 11.99 x 2 = 23.98
*/
```
    
## Challenge 

Try your best to build as much of the shopping cart described above. This is an exercise
that should take an hour. Don't over build. This is also meant as a self assessment to 
give your a measure of your current JavaScript skill. 

If you are not familiar with JavaScript you may not finish the problem which is ok. Try 
solve as much as you can. 

If you are new to JavaScript or find the challenge difficult don't worry we will be 
covering more JavaScript in class. You should practice your JavaScript skills outside 
of class. 

Try these resources to build your JS skills. 

- http://www.learn-js.org
- https://www.codecademy.com/learn/javascript

## Schedule 

| What            | Time |        | Activity   |
|-----------------|------|--------|------------|
|Intro            |10 min|  10 min| Talk       |
|Challenge Intro  | 5 min|  15 min| Q & A      |
|Challenge        |60 min|  75 min| Challenge! |
|Break            |10 min|  85 min| Meditate   |
|Challenge Review |30 min| 115 min| We Do      |
|Review project   | 5 min| 120 min| Talk       |
