# Anatomy & Architecture of Well Crafted Go Apps

## Minute by Minute

| **Elapsed** | **Time**  | **Activity**              |
| ----------- | --------- | ------------------------- |
| 0:00        | 0:05      | Objectives                |
| 0:05        | 0:15      | Initial Exercise          |
| 0:20        | 0:20      | Overview                  |
| 0:40        | 0:10      | BREAK                     |
| 0:50        | 0:40      | In Class Activity I       |
| 1:30        | 0:30      | Continue Challenges       |
| TOTAL       | 2:00      |                           |

## Why You Should Know This

Today's class will help you to create models that you can use in your applications, in any language, throughout your entire career.

## Learning Objectives (5 min)

1. Define what "modeling the domain" means to engineers.
2. Design a program around the paradigms present in the Go language.
3. Implement `struct`s or `interface`s that represent the nouns generated in class, and `func`s to represent verbs.

## Overview/TT I (20 min)

- Use [makefeedback](https://www.github.com/droxey/makefeedback) to go over:
  - Golang project structure.
  - How to model the domain of an application from a mockup or idea.
  - The diagram of steps we'll use in class in order to create the nouns and verbs that solve a problem programmatically.

## BREAK (10 min)

## In Class Activity I (40 min)

1. Pair up, and on small whiteboards, write out some **nouns that could be represented in code.**
1. After 10 minutes, swap the whiteboard with a team at your table.
1. Implement a `struct` or `interface` using one of the nouns generated by the first group.
1. After 10 minutes, ask students to hold up their programmatic models.
1. Ask students to swap whiteboards with yet another team at their tables.
1. Implement a function (verb) on the whiteboards based on the programmatic representations of their peers.
1. **Your deliverable today: post your complete implementation on Slack in a code block!**
