# Day 8 - API Design in Rails

| Time | Activity             |
| ---- | -------------------- |
| 0:00 | Objectives           |
| 0:05 | Initial Exercise     |
| 0:20 | Overview/TT          |
| 0:35 | In Class Activity I  |
| 0:40 | BREAK                |
| 0:50 | Overview/TT II       |
| 1:10 | In Class Activity II |
| 1:50 | END                  |

## Learning Objectives/Competencies (5 Minutes)

1. Identify and describe **12 factors that will improve your API designs and implementations**.
1. Define the **scope for your Custom API project**.
1. Implement your **Custom API project proposal**.

## Initial Exercise

### Custom API Project Ideas (15 Minutes)

- Review the [custom API project requirements](../Projects/requirements.md) and [rubric](../Projects/rubric.md) to **get a sense of the scope required** for the final deliverable in BEW 1.3. **Remember, you need to score `>=70%` to pass the class!**

- **THINK**: Write down **at least 5 ideas** for your custom API project **based on the requirements and rubric**.

- **PAIR**: Turn to the person next to you. Share and reflect on the ideas you generated.

- **SHARE**. **Choose `2` ideas** that inspire you. Have them ready! We'll share them later on today.

- **NOTE: You may fly solo for this project, or opt to work with a partner.**

## Overview/TT I

### 12 Factor Applications (20 Minutes)

Present this [lightning talk](12factor-lightning.pdf) on designing effective applications using the 12 Factor approach to web development.

## In Class Activity I

### Research a Factor (15 Minutes)

- Assign each student a single factor to research from [12factor.net](https://12factor.net).
- Have them each complete a **3-5 sentence summary about the topic** and **post it to `#bew1-3`**.

## BREAK (10 Minutes)

## Overview/TT II

### RESTApi in Rails (30 Minutes)

Present this [slide show](https://rubygarage.github.io/slides/api) on how to effectively implement 12 factor applications in Ruby on Rails.

## In Class Activity II

### Prime the Proposal Pump (20 Minutes)

- Go around the room and **ask for the ideas generated by students in the Initial Exercise**.
- Ask students for a **one to three sentence pitch** for each idea.
- **Discuss ideas** together as a group!

## After Class

### Initialize & Propose - Due Friday 11/16/2018 by 10pm.

**REMEMBER: You may fly solo for this project, or opt to work with a partner.**

1. Create a [new GitHub repo](https://github.com/new).
1. If you're working in pairs, **invite your partner as a collaborator** for the project on GitHub.
1. **Clone** the repository locally.
1. `cd` to the cloned directory. **Create a `proposal.md` file. Link it in your `README.md`**.
1. Write **3 to 5 sentences** that tell me:
    - What you're going to create.
    - Why it's useful.
1. Add, commit, and **push your proposal document** to GitHub.
1. **Add your repository link to the [progress tracker](https://make.sc/trackbew1.3) BY **11:59pm on Friday**.
1. The instructor will **provide feedback** on your proposal **in the form of a GitHub issue before the beginning of class on Day 9**.
